---
title: 'Paper Summary: Online Convex Programming and Generalized Infinitesimal Gradient Ascent'
date: 2021-01-12
permalink: /posts/2021/01/GIGA/
tags:
  - Online Optimization
  - paper summary
---
In this blog, I will give a summary of the paper ["Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. Proc. of ICML, 2003."](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~maz/publications/techconvex.pdf) and talk about some of my understandings. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first paper that introduces the *online convex programming*, which is a generalization of the well-studied experts problem. Besides, A simple and natural method is proposed, namely the *generalized Infinitesimal Gradient Ascent (GIGA)*. This algorithm is straightforward but powerful with certain advantages. The paper first introduces the form online convex programming followed by a greedy projection algorithm. Then the GIGA method is proposed in the context of repeated games. The GIGA method is a generalized version of the algorithm *infinitesimal gradient ascent*, which is originally proposed for repeated games.

### 1. Online Convex Programming and Greedy Projection

In the traditional convex optimization problem, we want to find a decision variable inside a constraint set such that it suffers the minimum cost. Every parameters of the problem is given beforehand. However, in an *online convex programming problem*, we do not know the cost function until the decision is made. Mathematically, given a feasible set $F \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n}$ at each time step $t$, we 

### 2. 

$$
R_G(T) \leq \frac{\| F \|^2 \sqrt{T}}{2} 
$$


